What is the  most plentiful metal in the earth's crust?
A: Aluminum, most of which is extracted from bauxite.

What Nobel Prize winner admitted that he had contributed his sperm to a sperm bank in hopes of producing exceptionally gifted children?
A: William Shockley, inventor of the transistor.

How long is a day on Mars?
A: 24 hours, 37 minutes and 22 seconds.

Even with leap year, the average year is about 26 seconds longer than Earth's orbital period. How many years will it take for those seconds to build up into a single day?
A: 3,323.

How many watts are there in one horsepower of energy?
A: 746.

How many calories are consumed during an hour of typing?
A: 110-- just 30 more an hour than the number consumed while sleeping.

Which celebrated chemist-inventor is credited with developing plywood?
A: Alfred Nobel, the inventor of dynamite and subsequent founder of the Nobel Prize.

What is cosmology?
A: The study of the origin and structure of the universe.

In the days when British sailors were given lime or lemon juice to prevent scurvy, what were Dutch sailors given?
A: Sauerkraut--or zourkool, as they called it.

How fast does lightning travel?
A: It travels 90,000 miles a second--almost half the speed of light.

What gives the gemstone turquoise its distinctive color?
A: Traces of copper.

What is the most plentiful element in seawater?
A: Chlorine.

What device was introduced commercially in 1934 as a "portable super regenerative receiver and transmitter"?
A: The walkie-talkie.

What color is topaz in its pure state?
A: It's colorless. Topaz takes on a variety of hues from trace elements, radiation and defects in its crystal structure. Pale gold-brown it its most common color.

Before the barometer was discovered, what animal did German meteorologists use to predict air pressure changes?
A: The frog. Frogs croak when the pressure drops.

At what temperature does water boil at the top of Mount Everest?
 A: At 150 F (or 70 C). At sea level, the boiling point of water is 212 F (100 C). As you get higher, the atmospheric pressure drops, and with it the boiling point of water.

What did a National Aeronautics and Space Administration employee buy at a wal-mart in 1995 to protect the space shuttle from woodpeckers?
A: Six plastic owls.

At what standard level above ground -- in feet-- do meteorologists measure wind speed?
A: 33 feet.

What planet has the greatest number of known satellites?
A: Saturn, with 20. Close behind are Jupiter, with 16, and Uranus, with 15.

How much further from Earth does the moon's orbit move every year?
A: About 1.5 inches. Scientists believe the moon has been inching away from Earth for billions of years.

What word was spelled out in the first neon sign?
A: Neon. The small bright red sign was created by Dr Perley G. Nutting, a government scientist, and exhibited at the 1904 Louisiana Purchase Exposition in St. Louis,  Missouri---15 years before neon signs became widely used commercially.

By definition, what is the lifting capacity of one unit of horsepower?
A: The ability to raise 33,000 pounds one foot high in one minute.

What was the original purpose of ENIAC, the world's first "modern" computer?
A: To compute ballistic trajectories for artillery shells. ENIAC--an acronym for Electronic numerical integrator and Calculator --was introduced in 1946.

What gives the  mineral turquoise its distinctive color?
A: Traces of copper.

What percentage of the average human brain is water?
A: 80 percent.

What does eccentricity mean to an astronomer?
A: The degree to which an orbit deviates from a circle.  The eccentricity of Earth's orbit is 0.07.

What is alloyed with steel to make it stainless?
A: Chromium.

Which planet weighs over twice as much as all the other known planets combined?
A: Jupiter, the largest planet in our solar system.

How fast--in miles per hour---do the fastest messages transmitted by the human nervous system travel?
A: 180 to 200 miles per hour.

How many frames --or pictures -- per second are transmitted over American television?
A: 30.

In years past what was used as transmission oil in Rolls-Royce automobiles?
A: Spermaceti oil--from the sperm whale.

How many pointers were there on the first clocks with hands--made in the fourteenth century?
A: Only one, the hour hand.

What temperature does the tungsten filament in an electric light reach when the light is turned on?
A: 2,577 Degrees C, or 4,664 degrees F.

Why did German scientist Wilhelm Roentgen name the invisible rays he discovered X-rays?
A: Because he had no idea what the mysterious rays were.

Who, long before Columbus, claimed the world was round, reasoning that if it were flat all the stars would be visible from all points on its surface?
A: Aristotle, who offered as added proof the fact that the earth casts a spherical shadow on the moon during an eclipse.

When did American sales of cassette recordings surpass those of long-playing records?
A: In 1983.

What product was originally called the Soundabout when it was introduced in the U.S. in 1970?
A: The Sony Walkman.

What do the letters represent in the acronym DNA -- the protein substance inside each cell that transmits genetic information from parent to child?
A: Deoxyribonucleic acid.

How long does a nanosecond last?
A: one billionth of a second.

How may different chemical reactions occur in the normal human brain every second?
A: At least 100,000.

In mathematics, what is the meaning of the term googol?
A: It represents the number 1 followed by 100 zeroes.

What word defines sounds too low for human hearing?
A: Infrasonic.

How did the element strontium--also known by the symbol SR and the atomic number 38--get its name?
A: From Strontian, the Scottish mining village in which it was discovered.

What reply did newspaper tycoon William Randolph Hearst receive when he sent a telegram to a leading astronomer asking "Is there life on Mars? Please cable on thousand words"?
A: "Nobody Knows" repeated 500 times.

How many pounds of lunar rock and soil were collected and brought back to Earth from America's six-expeditions to the moon?
A: 841.6.

What planet is most like earth in size, mass, density and gravity?
A:  Venus.

What is the name of the computer program developed by the Los Angeles Police Department to help solve homicides?
A: HITMAN--for Homicide Information Tracking Management Automation Network.

What heavenly bodies have astronomers named after Brahms, Beethoven, Bach, the four Beatles and Eric Clapton--among others?
A Asteroids.

What is the softest mineral known?
A: Talc.

Where were the first objects in the solar system discovered by means of a telescope?
A: The four largest satellites of Jupiter--Ganymede, Io, Callisto and Europa.

How long is a Martian Year in Earth days--a year being the length of time it takes the planet to revolve once around the Sun?
A: 687 days.

What two elements comprise almost 100 percent of the matter in the universe?
A: Hydrogen (approximately 75 percent) and helium (approximately 25 percent). The remaining, heavier elements constitute a mere fraction of existence.

In the American system of mathematical progressions, what five denominations come after million, billion and trillion?
A: Quadrillion, quintillion, sextillion, septillion and octillion.

What is present in the variety of quartz stone known as cat's-eye that gives it its unique glowing appearance?
A: Asbestos fibers. The low is known as chatoyancy.

What belief was Galileo forced to recant by the Inquisition in 1633?
A: That the earth revolved around a stationary sun. He was kept under house arrest for the last eight years of his life for debunking the traditional belief that he earth was the center of the universe.

In astronomy, what is a white dwarf?
A: The dense, burned-out remains of a star; a stellar corpse.

Why are Mercury and Venus known as inferior planets?
A: Their orbits are closer to the sun than Earth's orbit. Planet orbiting the sun beyond Earth are referred to as superior planets.

In geology, what is calving?
A: The breaking off or detachment of an iceberg from a glacier that has reached the sea, or the separation of a portion of a floating iceberg.

What common chemical compound is represented by the formula NH3?
A: Ammonia.

What does the chemical symbol Fe2O3 represent?
A: Rust.

What element is named after a state?
A: Californium, first produced in 1950 by scientists at the University of California at Berkeley.

What important point did Scottish mathematician John Napier come up with in the early seventeenth century?
A: The decimal point.

What was the name of the first computer used for weather research?
A: MANIAC--an acronym for Mathematical Analyzer, Numerical Integrator and Computer.

When is Halley's comet, first observed in 240 B.C. and last seen in 1986, expected to appear again?
A: In the year 2061.

What planet has surface winds that have been measured at 1,500 mph--the strongest in the solar system?
A: Neptune.

How much coal does it take to get the same amount of energy provided by burning one full cord of seasoned firewood.?
A: One ton.

On what planet is the largest known mountain in the solar system?
A: On Mars. Called Olympus Mons, it's a volcano more than three times the height of Mount Everest.

If you hear thunder 10 seconds after you see lighting, how far away was the lightning?
A: 2 miles away. Sound travels about a mile in 5 seconds.

What type of coal is brown and fibrous?
A: Lignite.

What is the sticky wax obtained from sheep?
A: Lanolin.

What is the trade name for the non-stick material used for coating cooking pans?
A: Teflon.

What name is given to the brittle kind of iron used for making engine blocks and manhole covers?
A: Cast Iron.

Which scientific unit gives a measure of loudness?
A: Decibel.

The behavior of sound in rooms and concert halls is a separate science. what is its name?
A: Acoustics.

What kind of animal is an iguana?
A: Reptile.

Camera film bears an ISO number. What does ISO stand for?
A: International Standards Organization.

What is the name given to the molten rock beneath the surface of the Earth?
A: Magma.

Which disease is spread in minute water drops?
A: Legionnaire's disease.

What raw material is used for making glass?
A: Sand.

What is the strong inelastic material found in a human tendon?
A: Collagen.

What material forms the hard outermost layer of a human tooth?
A: Enamel.

Snowflakes are symmetrical. How many sides do they have?
A: Six.

What name is given to an atomic particle carrying a negative charge?
A: Electron.

DNA is found in which part of the cell?
A: Nucleus.

By which name is the drug acetylsalicylic acid better known?
A: Aspirin.

How many legs has an insect?
A: Six.

What kind of an organism is a truffle?
A: Fungus.

Where in the body does a cataract form?
A: The eye.

What is the most abundant element in the universe?
A: Hydrogen.

Which flower has the same name as a diaphragm in the eye?
A: Iris.

What is the name of the strong material found in plant cell walls?
A: Cellulose.

Which animals are arthropods and have eight legs?
A: Arachnids.

Which is the modern scientific unit of work and energy?
A: Joule.

Chlorine, fluorine and bromine belong to which family of elements?
A: Halogens.

What name is given to  the change of state from liquid to gas?
A: Evaporation.

Who pioneered the airship?
A: Count Von Zeppelin.

What in genetics, is the term denoting the transmission of traits and characteristics from parents of offspring?
A: Heredity / inheritance.

Which scientist discovered the neutron?
A: James Chadwick.

Which was the first antibiotic to be discovered?
A: Penicillin.

What is oncology?
A: Branch of medicine concerning cancer.

What is the boiling point of water?
A: 100 degrees Celsius.

Ascorbic acid is which vitamin?
A: Vitamin C.

What, specifically, are the metals amalgam, solder, pewter and steel?
A: Alloys.

What is the generic term for the mechanical, electrical and electronic components of a computer?
A: Hardware.

Whose research on X-ray diffraction of ?DNA crystals helped Crick and Watson during the race to discover the structure of DNA?
A: Rosalind Franklin.

Heisenberg is most associated with which branch of physics?
A: Quantum Mechanics.

What did Heike Kamerlingh-Onnes discover?
A: Superconductivity.

What science is the study of missiles in motion?
A: Ballistics.

Which branch of science has four fundamental principles: addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.
A: Arithmetic.

What kind of elements are found in a pure state in nature?
A: Native elements.

What are classified by their measurement in degrees as "right", "reflex", "obtuse", or "acute"?
A: Angles.

What is the name given to the longest side of a right-angled triangle?
A: Hypotenuse.

Which scientist won the Nobel Prize for Chemistry and the Nobel Peace Prize?
A: Linus Pauling.

Who persuaded Einstein to write to President F D Roosevelt of the USA, warning him of the power of atomic fission?
A: Leo Szilard.

Who developed the modern system of classifying plants and animals?
A: Linnacus.

Who was captain of Darwin's ship HMS Beagle, and subsequently became governor of New Zealand.
A: Robert Fitzroy.

Robert Oppenheimer is remembered for his work on which invention?
A: Atomic Bomb.

Which radioactive element is named after the progenitor of the periodic table?
A: Mendelevium.

Who suggested that 'necessity is the mother of invention'?
A: Ovid.

Stephen Jay Gould developed which evolutionary theory?
A: Punctuated equilibrium.

What is a device in a machine which allows free movement, especially of a rotating shaft in a housing?
A: Bearing.

What is the branch of science concerning the study of bodies in motion?
A: Kinetics.

Who, referring to the principle of leverage, said, 'Give me the place to stand and I will move the earth'?
A: Archimedes.

Einstein left Germany to work at which American university?
A: Princeton.

In which area of science are the terms CPU, PC and VDU used?
A: Computer science.

What is 'Lamarckism'?
A: A theory of evolution.

Who shared a Nobel Prize for Physics with his son?
A:  William Bragg.

What is the word which means either the strength of an earthquake or the brightness of a star?
A: Magnitude.

Who claimed that the sciences and the arts were divided by a gaping chasm?
A: C. P. Snow.

Camphor is what type of chemical?
A: Ketone.

Potassium belongs to which group of elements?
A: Alkali metals.

What discovery, made by Alec Jeffreys in the mid-1980s, is now used as a means of identification?
A: Genetic Fingerprinting.

Who discovered X-rays?
A: Rontgen.

Which of Einstein's theories of relativity, the general or the special, was published first?
A: Special theory of relativity published in 1905.

What is another name for a rhombus whose internal angles are equal?
A: Square.

Who first proposed that the geological processes occurring now can be used to understand the changes of the past?
A: James Hutton.

Which metallic element, with the atomic number 83, is used to soothe gastric ulcers?
A: Bismuth.

What was the first synthetic plastic?
A: Bakelite.

What is the name for a three-dimensional curve generated by a line encircling a cylinder at a constant angle?
A: Helix.

Which scientist proposed that atoms are the smallest unit of matter?
A: Dalton.

Who was the first Englishman to put a dinosaur on show?
A: Richard Owen.

Who was the first scientist to win Nobel Prizes for Physics and Chemistry?
A: Marie Curie.

Which metaphysician developed the theory of calculus at the same time as did Newton?
A: Leibniz.

Which nebula is contained in the constellation Taurus?
A: The Crab.

What is the more common name for oil of vitriol?
A: Sulphuric acid.

What name is given to the medieval practices which tried to turn lead into silver and gold?
A: Alchemy.

Which field of learning attracted the attention of the ancient Greek Galen?
A: Medicine.

What is measured by a hygrometer and a hygroscope?
A: Relative humidity.

Who developed a general electrochemical theory as well as effective ways of poisoning people?
A: Fritz Haber.

The first florin, minted in 1252, was composed of which material?
A: Gold.

 

Which scientist wrote the science-fiction novel "The Black Cloud?
A: Fred Hoyle.

Who lived in Pisa, discovered that freely falling bodies have an identical acceleration, and died under house arrest?
A: Galileo.

What is the name of the process of freezing bodies at the moment of death, with the aim of resuscitation later?
A: Cryonics.

Who was director of the Natural History Museum during Darwin's lifetime and one of his strongest opponents?
A: Richard Owen.

What term is given to creatures such as earthworms which are both male and female?
A: Hermaphrodite.

Which problem ensures that no scientific statement can ever be 'true'?
A: The problem of induction.

Which material is produced by the Haber process?
A: Ammonia.

What name is given to the study of very low tgemperatures?
A: Cryogenics.

Which English naturalist, concurrently and independently, arrived at a theory of evolution similar to that of Darwin?
A: Alfred Wallace.

What is the earliest known unit of length?
A: Cubit.

What is the Hertz?
A: The unit for expressing frequency.

What are the four fundamental forces of nature?
A: Gravity; electromagnetic force; strong nuclear force; weak nuclear force.

What is divided into genera in plant and animal classification?
A: Family.

Who proposed that in searching for an explanation one should reduce assumptions to a minimum?
A: William of Occam.

Rusting produces which material?
A: Iron Oxide.

Where would you find a Golgi body?
A: Inside a cell.

What is said to have been invented by Charles Babbage when he designed his 'analytical engine' in 1833?
A: Computer.

What unit is used in measuring the height of a horse?
A: Hand.

What is used as the lead in pencils?
A: Graphite.

What aptly describes all transuranic elements?
A: Radioactive.

What are formed by the condensation reaction of dibasic acids and polyhydric alcohols?
A: Polyesters.

Which element is used in the manufacture of computer microprocessors?
A: Silicon.

Which metal is the best conductor of electricity?
A: Sliver.

Argon, helium, krypton, neon, radon, and xenon are the six inert gases. What is another name for this group?
A: Noble gases.

Which gas is essential for combustion?
A: Oxygen.

What gas is needed by plants for photosynthesis to occur?
A: Carbon dioxide.

What fuel is used by a Bunsen burner?
A: Gas.

Which branch of philosophy rejects as meaningless everything except logic, mathematics, science, and observation?
A: Logical positivism.

Tungsten gets its name from the words 'heavy stone'. But in which language?
A: Swedish.

Who founded the science of electromagnetism?
A: Hans Oersted.

What describes a triangle whose three sides are all of different lengths?
A: Scalene.

What is any material that allows the passage of electricity and heat called?
A: Conductor.

Which oxide expands by one-eleventh of its volume when frozen?
A: Water.

What is another name for lanthanide?
A: Rare earth.

What is the ultimate source of energy for most renewable energy systems?
A: Sun.

Which capital city is heated by volcanic springs?
A: Reykjavik.

Which part of the eye contains light-sensitive cells?
A: Retina.

Which branch of philosophy emphasizes the importance of sense experience?
A: Empiricism.

Which philosopher of science wrote Against Method?
A: Paul Feyerabend.

Who said 'the physicists have known sin; and this is a knowledge which they cannot lose'?
A: Robert Oppenheimer.

What is the name of the material found inside living cells but outside the nucleus?
A: Cytoplasm.

How many moons has Mars?
A: Two.

What is the study of electronic systems that can perform the functions of living beings?
A: Bionics.

How many yards are there in a mile?
A: 7,760.

What metal is an alloy of copper and tin?
A: Bronze.

What is the collective name for the five elements which make up Group VII of the periodic table?
A: Halogens.

What is the technique of analytical chemistry for finding the concentration of a dissolved compound by using a reagent?
A: Titration.

Which element was discovered to have a link with Alzheimer's disease?
A: Aluminum.

Which kind of energy is possessed by a stretched spring?
A: Potential energy.

What device converts chemical energy into electrical energy?
A: Battery or cell.

How are the beams of an electron microscope focused?
A: With electro magnetic coils.

What name is given to the color-sensitive cells in the eye?
A: Cones.

Which nerves are responsible for smell?
A: Olfactories.

Which protein forms the main constituent of an insect's exoskeleton?
A: Chitin.

American designer Louis Comfort Tiffany is famous for his work in which material?
A: Glass.

What natural organism is used to obtain litmus dye, used as an indicator in chemistry?
A: Lichen.

How many pecks are there in a bushel?
A: Four.

What are the three states of matter?
A: Solid, liquid, and gas.

Which metal is produced from the ores limonite, hematite and magnetite?
A: Iron.

What element is found in bones, teeth, and shells?
A: Calcium.

Which metal of the platinum group is twice as heavy as lead?
A: Iridium.

Bauxite is the ore of which element?
A: Aluminum.

What kind of energy does a moving object possess?
A: Kinetic energy.

What kind of electron microscope would be used for examining a surface?
A: Scanning electron microscope.

How do bats 'see in the dark'?
A: Echolocation.

Corundum is a mineral oxide of which metal?
A: Aluminum.

Which gas, produced by rotting vegetation, causes the phenomenon known as will o' the wisp??
A: Methane.

What is the most common element in the Universe?
A: Hydrogen.

From where do green plants get their energy?
A: From light.

Which instrument is used to detect radioactivity?
A: Geiger counter.

What is the medical term for not being able to smell?
A: Anosmia.

What kind of material is 'Quorn'?
A: A mycoprotein.

What is the mixture of potassium nitrate, charcoal and sulphur which constitutes the explosive used in fireworks?
A: Gunpowder.

Which element is used to treat indigestion and stomach acidity?
A: Magnesium.

What is the term for the production of light by living organisms?
A: Bioluminescence.

Which plants did Gregor Mendel use for his experiments on genetics?
A: Pea plants.

Which nerve carries information from the eye to the brain?
A: Optic nerve.

Which part of the ear helps you balance?
A: Semicircular canals.

Ornithophily is what?
A: A type of reproduction among flowering plants.

What name is given to calcite deposits suspended from cave roofs?
A: Stalactites.

Which element is mixed with copper to make brass?
A: Zinc.

Sunburn is caused by which type of electromagnetic radiation?
A: Ultraviolet radiation.

What technique is often used for identifying substances or for checking their purity?
A: Spectroscopy.

How many basic tastes can the human tongue distinguish?
A: Four.

Which Russian chemist devised the first form of the periodic table in 1869?
A: Mendeleyev.

From which country did fireworks originate?
A: China.

Which lightweight metal is used in the manufacture of aircraft, cars and ships?
A: Aluminum.

Which molecule is the source of energy for the body?
A: Glucose.

What does a potometer measure?
A: Transpiration stream in a plant.

Which composer wrote much  of his finest music when he was deaf?
A: Beethoven.

What is the prefix denoting 'multiplied by 10 to the power 6'?
A: Mega.

What is a very hard, transparent form of carbon, whose crystals are octahedral in shape?
A: Diamond.

Which is the lightest of all the elements?
A: Hydrogen.

In degrees Kelvin, what is absolute zero?
A: Zero.

What information does the technique of carbon dating aim to provide?
A: The age of a rock, fossil or other sample.

What phenomenon is characterized by constant sound in the ears?
A: Tinnitus.

Which French chemist gave oxygen its name and proved that water was a compound of oxygen and hydrogen?
A: Lavoisier.

What is the major ore of uranium?
A: Pitchblende.

Which common mineral is used to make casts, moulds, blackboard chalk and plaster of Paris?
A: Gypsum.

Which element was found in Greenland in 1989?
A: Gold.

The sun's energy is produced by which type of nuclear reaction?
A: Fusion.

Which instrument allowed Galileo to make his discovery that the Moon has mountains and craters?
A: Telescope.

Which part of the eye gives it color?
A: Iris.

What name is given to the series of international units used by scientists?
A: SI.

Which element is used as a disinfectant, as a bleaching agent and to purify water?
A: Chlorine.

Which poisonous yellow gas is commonly used in refrigerants?
A: Fluorine.

Which type of radiation is screened out by the Earth's ozone layer?
A: Ultraviolet radiation.

What does a micrometer gauge measure?
A: Small lengths.

Which part of the eye gets smaller when the lights go on?
A: Pupil.

What is a fathom?
A: An obsolete unit of depth used by seafarers and miners.

Which toxic, crystalline metalloid has the chemical symbol As?
A: Arsenic.

Which element ignites spontaneously in normal air?
A: Phosphorus.

Which law would be violated by a perpetual motion machine?
A: The law of conservation of energy.

What is the name given to the technique of measuring at a distance?
A: Telemetry.

How many color pigments are there in the human retina?
A: Three.

What is alloyed with lead to make pewter?
A: Tin.

What is a very hard, naturally-occurring mineral, of which ruby and sapphire are gem-quality varieties?
A: Corundum.

Which metallic element is an important constituent of hemoglobin?
A: Iron.

What form of energy is produced by an electric motor?
A: Mechanical energy.

Which human sense organ may be sensitive to magnetic fields?
A: Nose.

What is the atomic number of magnesium?
A: 12

Which part of the brain regulates physiological stability in the body?
A: Hypothalamus.

Which organ is responsible for regulating the blood sugar level?
A: Pancreas.

Which organ makes urine?
A: Kidney.

What is the scapula?
A: Shoulder blade.

What is the scientific name for the human ''tail'?
A: Coccyx.

Where are the ossicles?
A: In the ear.

When might a person show rapid eye movement (REM)?
A: During sleep.

Which organ removes excess water from the blood?
A: Kidney.

Which is the most acidic part of the digestive system?
A: Stomach.

A deficiency of which vitamin can cause scurvy?
A: Vitamin C.

What is the average human body temperature when taken by a thermometer under the tongue.
A: 98.4 degrees F.

What are the two main veins in the neck, returning blood from the brain to the heart?
A: Jugular veins.

What is the term fro a series of uncontrollable  intakes of air caused by sudden spasms of the diaphragm?
A: Hiccups.

Which part of the eye contains about 137 million light-sensitive cells in one square inch?
A: Retina.

What is the more common name for the tympanic membrane?
A: Ear drum.

What is the name for a red blood cell?
A: Erythrocyte.

What is the scientific name for the windpipe?
A: Trachea.

Where do the Graafian follicles develop?
A: Ovaries.

Which part of the body produces the excretory product urea?
A: Liver.

Where would you find the pisiform bone?
A: Wrist.

What is the scientific name for the kneecap?
A: Patella.

What is protected by the cranium?
A: Brain.

What is the name of the large muscle just beneath the lungs?
A: Diaphragm.

Where in the body is the thyroid?
A: The neck.

Which glands secrete adrenaline?
A: Adrenal glands.

Which organ in the body stores excess sugar as glycogen?
A: Liver.

What name is given to the small bones which form the spinal column?
A: Vertebrae.

Which teeth are the third molars, and are always the last to0 erupt?
A: Wisdom teeth.

What is secreted by the pancreas to regulate blood sugar levels?
A: Insulin.

Where in the body are the cerebellum, the medulla and the hypothalamus?
A: Brain.

What makes up 60-70% of human body weight?
A: Water.

What beats more than 2,000 million times during an average lifetime - or about 72 beats per minute?
A: Heart.

What are the very narrow blood vessels which form a network between arteries and veins?
A: Capillaries.

What is the name of the membrane enclosing the fluid around the fetus?
A: Amnion; amniotic membrane.

What is the ring of bones at the hip called?
A: Pelvic girdle.

What is the colorless liquid, consisting of plasma and white cells, which bathes the body tissues?
A: Lymph.

What tube connects the kidney to the bladder?
A: Ureter.

What is the name of the structural tissue found in the ear, the nose, and in between the vertebral discs?
A: Cartilage.

Which artery supplies the kidney with blood?
A: Renal artery.

Which organ destroys old red blood cells?
A: Spleen.

Which three bones are collectively known as the auditory ossicles?
A: Hammer; anvil; stirrup.

How many chambers has the heart?
A: Four.

How many ventricles are there in the human heart?
A: Two.

What is the scientific name for the tube connecting the mouth with the stomach?
A: Oesophagus.

Which parts of the body are formed by the bones of the metatarsals and phalanges?
A: Feet.

What is the fluid that lubricates and cushions the movable joints between the bones?
A: Synovial fluid.

What is the oxygen-carrying protein found in the red blood cells of the body?
A: Hemoglobin.

What are the chemicals produced by the endocrine glands to control body functions?
A: Hormones.

Where in the human body do you find the alveoli?

A: Lung.

What name is given to the genetic make-up of an individual?
A: Genotype.

A bone is joined to a muscle by which structure?
A: Tendon.

What is the biggest bone in the body?
A: Femur.

Which of the retina's cells can distinguish between different wavelengths of light?
A: Cone cells.

What is the name of the large buttock and thigh muscle?
A: Gluteus maximus.

Which hormone causes male sexual development?
A: Testosterone.

Which part of the brain controls the heart rate?
A: Medulla oblongata.

How many genes are there in the human genome?
A: 80,000.

When the egg is released from the ovary, what is left behind?
A: Corpus luteum.

What is an overgrowth of fibrous tissue, usually produced at the site of a scar?
A: Keloid.

Which is the only vein in the body to carry oxygenated blood?
A: Pulmonary vein.

Which human body organ weighs about 2 kilos?
A: Liver.

What is the threshold of noise-induced pain, measured in decibels?
A: 140db.

Which name is given to the heart chamber which receives blood?
A: Atrium.

Which organ makes bile?
A: Liver.

What kind of joint is the hip?
A: Ball-and-socket.

What term is given to the lymphocytes which mature in the thymus?
A: T cells.

Where is the sinoatrial node?
A: Heart.

What is the substance that the body over-produces in an allergic reaction to pollen?
A: Histamine.

Where is the pituitary gland?
A: In the brain.

Which organ of the body secretes insulin?
A: Pancreas.

Where are the semicircular canals?
A: The inner ear.

Which part of the gut absorbs water from thje food?
A: Colon.

Where would you find the islets of Langerhans?
A: Pancreas.

What is the colored muscle that responds involuntarily to light?
A: Iris.

What is the name of the enzyme produced in the mouth?
A: Salivary amylase.

Which glands secrete estrogen?
A: Ovaries.

The pituitary controls many hormones, but what controls the pituitary?
A: Hypothalamus.

What is the pigment that colors skin?
A: Melanin.

Which tissue secretes progesterone during the second half of the menstrual cycle?
A: Corpus luteum.

Which gland secretes the corticosteroids?
A: Adrenal.

What are the natural pain-killing substances produced in the brain and pituitary gland?
A: Endorphins.

In which organ are the feces formed?
A: Colon.

What is the function of the islets of Langerhans?
A: They secrete insulin.

What is the scientific name for the heart's pacemaker?
A: Sinoatrial node.

Which hormone helps control ovulation?
A: Luteinizing hormone.

What hormone was discovered by John Jacob Abel?
A: Adrenaline.

What is the substance produced by hard exercise and oxygen debt, causing stiffness in the muscles?
A: Lactic acid.

Where would you find the carotid arteries?
A: Neck.

Of what do we have 52 in a lifetime, 20 of which are deciduous?
A: Teeth.

Which protein forms hair and nails?
A: Keratin.

Which Swedish scientist had a temperature scale named after him?
A: Anders Celsius.

How many colors are there in the spectrum when white light is separated?
A: Seven.

What is the term used to denote the tendency of an object to remain in a state of rest until acted upon by an external force?
A: Inertia.

The discovery of which law provoked the surprised cry 'Eureka!'?
A: Archimedes Principle.

What is measured by the SI unit called a 'henry'?
A: Inductance.

What is the force that opposes the relative motion of two bodies that are in contact?
A: Friction.

What is the study and use of frequencies above 20 khz?
A: Ultrasonic's.

What is an unchanging position in which forces cancel each other out?
A: Equilibrium.

Which physicist's law states that equal volumes of all gases, measured at the same temperature and pressure, contain the same number of molecules?
A: Amadeo Avogadro.

What is the ability of fluids to offer resistance to flow?
A: Viscosity.

What was invented by Dennis Gabor in 1947, winning him a Nobel prize in 1971?
A: Holography / Holograms.

What is described as an ionized gas with approximately equal numbers of positive and negative charges?
A: Plasma.

What name is given to the very serious chain of events which can follow the failure of the cooling system in a nuclear reactor?
A: Meltdown.

Which electronic device magnifies the strength of a signal?
A: Amplifier.

What was the name of the unit of heat now replaced by the joule?
A: Calorie.

What does c represent in the equation e = mc*2?
A: Speed of light.

What is commonly used in a rectifier to convert alternating current to direct current?
A: Diode.

What is a cylindrical coil of wire in which a magnetic field is created when an electric current is passed though it?
A: Solenoid.

What describes a substance that exists in more than one form, differing in physical rather than chemical properties?
A: Allotropic.

Whose 'unified field theory' tried to explain the four fundamental forces in terms of a single, unified force?
A: Einstein.

IN Britain, how many lines makeup the picture on a TV screen?
A: 625.

What diverges rays of light, if it is concave?
A: Lens.

What can be expressed as the number of cycles of a vibration occurring per unit of time?
A: Frequency.

What is the product of the mass of a body and its linear velocity?
A: Momentum.

Which quantity has direction as well as magnitude?
A: Vector quantity.

What is the SI unit of magnetic flux density, named after a Croatian electrical engineer?
A: Tesla.

What does the abbreviation STP stand for?
A: Standard Temperature and Pressure.

What is studied in the science of cryogenics?
A: Very low temperature.

What does the acronym maser stand for?
A: Microwave amplification by stimulated emission of radiation.

What is the favorite food of the giant panda?
A: Bamboo shoots.

What leaves does a silkworm prefer to eat?
A: Mulberry.

How long is a giraffe's neck, approximately?
A: 3 meters.

What kind of an animal is a marmoset?
A: An American monkey.

Which plant has flowers but no proper leaves?
A: Cactus.

What name is given to animals that eat both flesh and plant material?
A: Omnivores.

Which flightless marine birds of the southern hemisphere live in rookeries?
A: Penguins.

Which species of decapod has varieties called "fiddler', 'spider' and 'hermit'?
A: Crab.

What is the name of the seasonal journey undertaken by many animals to distant feeding band breeding grounds?
A: Migration.

Which digestive organ is well-developed in grass-eating herbivores, but is only vestigial in humans?
A: Appendix.

Which are the only birds able to fly backwards?
A: Hummingbirds.

Photosynthesis is carried out in which part of the cell?
A: Chloroplast.

What is the name of the protective outer layer of trees?
A: Bark.

What liquid do plants need for photosynthesis?
A: Water.

What is the fastest animal on two legs?
A: An Ostrich.

What is the green pigment used by plants to trap sunlight?
A: Chlorophyll.

What are the young of bats called?
A: Pups.

Which plant has flowers but no proper leaves?
A: Cactus.

What is the larva of a toad called?
A: Tadpole.

Which bird, a member of the cuckoo family, is often seen dashing along the highways of the southern USA and Mexico... hence its name?
A: Roadrunner.

What grow as parasites and saprotrophs, contain no chlorophyll, and reproduce by means of spores?
A: Fungi.

Why do fish have gills?
A: To absorb oxygen.

Which animal can move by jet propulsion?
A: Octopus.

Which acid is produced in large quantities by lemon trees?
A: Citric Acid.

What id the name given to the study of birds?
A: Ornithology.

What name is given to the microscopic plants found in great numbers in rivers, lakes, and oceans?
A: Algae.

Of which reptile are there only two species, one living in the Mississippi and the other in China?
A: Alligator.

What are the nocturnal, herding herbivores of Australia, Tasmania, and New Guinea?
A: Kangaroos.

What type of seaweed grows up to 100 meters in length, and is farmed for its alginates?
A: Kelp.

Where in an animal would you find a mandible?
A: Skull.

Which vertebrates have a skeleton of cartilage rather than bone?
A: Sharks.

Which European tree lives the longest?
A: Yew.

What is a beaver's home called?
A: Lodge.

Which tissue carries sugary sap around the plant?
A: Phloem.

Which cells form the middle layer of plant leaves?
A: Mesophyll.

How long is the gestation period of a duck-billed platypus?
A: It doesn't have one.

Which antipodean bird is the largest member of the kingfisher family?
A: Kookaburra.

Which microscopic organisms form the basis of marine and freshwater food chains?
A: Plankton.

Which bird feeds with its head upside-down and its beak held horizontally beneath the water?
A: Flamingo.

Where in a vertebrate would you find the protein myoglobin?
A: Muscle tissue.

What kind of a tongue does the okapi have?
A: Prehensile.

What do baleen whales eat?
A: Krill.

What is the name of the food storage organ found in many birds?
A: Crop.

What is the most abundant substance in the plant kingdom, which no mammal produces the enzyme to digest?
A: Cellulose.

Which family of insects has species named 'drivers', 'weavers', 'and even individuals called 'soldiers'?
A: Ant.

Which South American vulture can have a wing span of up to 3 meters and a body weight of up to 13 kilos?
A: Condor.

What name is given to the study of animal behavior?
A: Ethology.

Which part of a beetle's body is a skeleton?
A: The outside.

Mosses are classified as belonging to which part of the plant kingdom?
A: Bryophyta.


What is the name of the structures which allow leaves to breathe?
A: Stomata.

In what state is a 'sessile' animal likely to be?
A: Stationary.

Which rodent rears its young, called kittens, in a nest called a drey?
A: Squirrel.

Which sub-division of plants is named after their practice of forming 'naked seeds'?
A: Gymnosperms.

The maidenhair tree is the sole survivor of which class of plant?
A: Ginko.

What is the state of inactivity through the dry, summer season, as hibernation is the dormancy of the winter months?
A: Aestivation.

Which insects' larvae secrete blobs of froth called 'cuckoo spit'?
A: Froghopper / spittlebug.

What kind of a creature is a scorpion?
A: Arachnid.

Which part of the common valerian is used to make a sedative?
A: Root.

What is the name of the structures which allow stems to breathe?
A: Lenticels.

What has a central vein called a midrib?
A: Leaf.

Which mammal constructs a lodge in which to store food, rear young, and pass the winter?
A: Beaver.

Which acid is contained in rhubarb leaves, making them poisonous to eat?
A: Oxalic acid.

What is a tragopan?
A: A Himalayan pheasant.

What kind of an organism causes a 'rust' attack on plants?
A: Fungus.

Which is the dominant generation in the ferns?
A: Sporophyte.

Which is the biggest flower in the world?
A: Fafflesia arnoldiana or stinking corpse lily.

What is the name of the lustrous substance that forms pearl and mother-of-pearl?
A: Nacre.

Which beautiful youth from mythology has a plant named after him?
A: Narcissus.

What is the name of the so-called 'first-bird'?
A: Archaeopteryx.

What do amoebas do by binary fission?
A: Reproduce.

What is the Latin word for 'liquid' which we use to mean the fluid produced by the tree Ficus elastica?
A: Latex.

What is the generic word for plants that grow in water or water-logged conditions?
A: Hydrophytes.

What is the main use of the tree Citrus bergamia?
A: Perfume.

In animal classification, how are the phyla subdivided?
A: Classes.

Which physician developed a type of remedy involving wild flowers?
A: Bach.

What kind of specialist would study storm petrels?
A: An ornithologist.

The best longbows were constructed from which wood?
A: Yew.

How many species of domestic dog are found today?
A: One.

What kind of creature is a barnacle?
A: A crustacean.

Machiavelli used which plant's name as the title of one of his books?
A: Mandrake.

What is the name of the evolutionary theory suggesting that evolution has an uneven pace?
A: Punctuated equilibrium.

Which step in photosynthesis is responsible for splitting water molecules?
A: Light reaction.

Which kind of organisms are likely to show a 'taxis'?
A: Protozoa.

What creature was named walckvogel --"disgusting bird"--by the Dutch explorers who first spotted it in 1598?
A: The flightless and now-extinct dodo.  The Dutch saw it on the island of Mauritius.

How long-- in feet---is the trunk of the average full-grown elephant?
A: 8 feet.

How many pounds of fish can a pelican hold in its pouch?
A: About 25 pounds.

An average human has 46 chromosomes. How many does a cabbage have?
A: 18.

On an average day how many hours does an elephant spend sleeping? How about a giraffe?
A: Four hours for both.

Some armadillos give birth to duodecuplets.  How many offspring is that?
 A: 12.

What parts of the oleander plant are toxic?
A: All parts. The seeds of the ornamental bush are usually the most toxic, the leaves a little less and the flowers lest--but still dangerous.  Eve the stems are toxic.

On average, how many peas are there in a pod?
A: Seven to nine.

What breed of dog is particularly distinctive because of a genetic condition called achondroplasia?
A: The dachshund.  Achondroplasia causes dwarfism--in the dachshund's case, abnormally short legs.

What bird has been spotted flying at 27,000 feet - higher than any other bird on record?
A: The whooper swan. A flock of 30 was spotted by a pilot and picked up on radar at that altitude in 1967.

How small is a pygmy right whale?
A: It's about 16 feet long.

The wild pomegranate is said to contain as many seeds as there are commandments in the Old Testament. How many is that?
A: 613.

What are zygodactyl feet?
A: Feet with two toes pointing forward and two pointing backward--which birds such as parakeets, parrots, and woodpeckers have.

What is the larva of the ant lion called?
A: A doodlebug.

What animal is the source of the luxuriously soft wool known as cashmere?
A: The Kashmir goat, which lives in mountainous regions of Kashmir in India, China, and Iran.

What percentage of the world's food crops are pollinated by insects?
A: 80 percent.

What is the difference between a crawfish and a crayfish?
A:  Nothing.

Which is larger, a crocodile's egg or a duck's egg?
A: They are about the same size...about 3 inches long.

What reptile, according to ancient legend, was able to live in fire?
A: The Salamander.

How many eyes do most spiders have?
A: Eight.

Where are the grasshopper's eardrums located?
A: Either on its forelegs or at the base of its abdomen, depending on the type of grasshopper.

How did the bird known as the Baltimore oriole get its name?
A: From its colors, orange and black--the same as those on the heraldic coat of arms of t he House of Baltimore, the family that founded the colony of Maryland and gave the city of Baltimore its name.

What do beavers eat?
A: The bark of hardwood trees, leaves, and aquatic and shore plants.  Beavers are vegetarians, and do not eat fish as is widely believed.

Berkshire, Cheshire, Victoria and Poland China are breeds of what animal?
A: The pig.

What percentage of its body weight does the average bear lose during hibernation?
A: Up to 25 percent.

If a man had a jumping ability proportional to that of the minuscule flea--which can make a horizontal leap of over a foot--how far would one leap take him?
A: Five city blocks.

When you cross cattle with a buffalo, what do you get?
A: Beefalo.

An octopus has eight tentacles.  How many does it relative the squid have?
A: Ten.

What is the normal body temperature of a horse?
A: 100.5 F.

What living creature is believed to enjoy more hours of daylight annually than any other?
A: The Arctic tern, which travels twice a year from pole to pole--covering more than 20,000 miles round -tip--to enjoy nearly four months of continuous daylight during the Arctic summer and another four months during the Antarctic summer.

What male mammal has the greatest number of mates in a season?
A: The northern fur seal, which averages 40 to 60 mates a season.

What is the difference between poultry and fowl?
A: Poultry is domesticated fowl.

The winter sleep of bears and other animals in cold climates is known as hibernation.  What do we call the summer sleep of desert snails and other creatures in excessively warm or dry climates.?
A: Estivation.

How many eyes--or eye spots-- do most starfish have?
A: Five--one at the tip of each of its arms.

Fish travel in schools; what about whales?
A: They get together in gams or pods.

How many muscles are there in a n elephant's trunk?
A: 100,000.

How many beats per second does a bumblebee flap is wings?
A: 160.

What distance can the average healthy slug cover in a day?
A: 50 yards.  Slug races generally are held on a 1-yard course.

What bird is the only one to have nostrils at the tip of its bill?
A: The Kiwi.

How many hairs does the average human scalp contain?
A: Between 120,000 and 150,000

Do peacocks give birth to their young or do they lay eggs?
A: Neither--a peacock is male, but a peahen lays eggs.

What is the only food a koala bear will eat?
A: The leaves of the eucalyptus tree.

How fast do flying fish "fly"?
A: They average 35 mph and have been known to go as fast as 45 mph.

How many cubic feet of gas does a cow belch on an average day?
A: Thirty-five.

When lions and tigers mate, what do you call their cubs?
A: Ligres when the father is a  lion; tigons or tiglons when the father is a tiger.

What are the seven colors of the rainbow?
A: Red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, and violet.

How many times a minute does the average adult elephant's heart beat?
A: Only 25. In man, the average adult heartbeat is 70 to 80 times per minute.

What animal always gives birth to identical quadruplets?
A: The nine-banded armadillo, known as Dasypus novemcinctus--the only armadillo native to the U.S.

How many sides are there to a snow crystal?
A: Six.

If seedless oranges don't have seeds, how are they propagated?
A :By grafting. The original seedless orange was a mutant.

What earthly creature has four "noses" and 3,000 tiny teeth?
A: The slug.

A beehive produces between 100 and 200 pounds of honey a year. How much does a single worker honeybee manufacture in its lifetime?
A: 1/12 teaspoon.

How long does it take a whole fingernail to replace itself?
A: About three months. Our nails grow about .1mm (.004) inch) per day.

What is on the daily menu for an adult hippopotamus at the National Zoo in Washington, D.C.?
A: About 10 pounds of kale, 3 gallons high -protein cereal pellets and 1/4 bale of alfalfa hay.

How many toes does an ostrich have?
A: Four, two on each of its feet.

How many eggs at a time do the most productive starfish release?
A: Up to 2.5 million.

How fast does the sound of thunder travel per second?
A: About 1,100 feet.

What creature produces sperm that are 2/3 inch long- the longest in the world?
A: Some fruit flies of the genus Drosophila. Their sperm, more than 300 times longer than human sperm, are six times longer than the fly itself--but hair-thin and all balled up.

How can you tell a fish's age?
A: From the number of growth rings on each of its scales. Each pair of rings represents a year--the dark narrow rings represents winter; the wider, lighter rings represents summer.

What animal's skin is the source of true Moroccan leather?
A: The goat.

What mammal is the only living member of its order?
A: The aardvark. Its order is Tubulidentata.

What two types of dogs were crossed to create the whippet?
A: The greyhound and the terrier.

What is the only land mammal native to New Zealand?
A: The bat.

How fast can a sailfish swim--in miles per hour?
A: More than 60 mph, faster than any other known fish. Humans have been recorded swimming up to 5.19 mph.

In the world of horses, what's a palomilla?
A: A milk-white horse with white mane an tail.

What are the only two types of mammals that are poisonous?
A: Shrews and platypuses. Some shrews have slightly poisonous bites, and male platypuses have poisonous spurs on their hind legs.

How many seeds from the giant sequoia tree-the most massive of all living things--are ther in an ounce?
A: 8,000. The seeds re 1/4 inch long. The largest giant sequoia in existence, the General Sherma, is in California's Sequoia National Park.

How many mosquito-size insects is the one-ounce brown bat--the most common bat in North America--capable of eating in an hour of nighttime dining?
A: About 500.

What from of precipitation generally falls only from cumulonimbus clouds?
A: Hail. Cumulonimbus clouds are heavy, selling, vertically developed clouds.

How wide an angle is the average person's field of vision?
A: About 200 degrees.

In what country did the French Poodle originate?
A: In Germany, where it was known as the pudel, from a word meaning "to splash in the water." In France, it's known as the caniche, which is derived from "duck dog." Its Latin name is canis familiaris aquatius.

How many of an adult domestic cat's 30 teeth are canines?
A: 4. The cat also has 12 incisors, 10 premolars and 4 molars.

How tall is a baby giraffe at birth?
A: About 6 feet.

Wild turkeys can run a t speeds of at least 12 miles an hour.  How fast can they fly?
A: Up to 55 miles per hour.

What famous naturalist penned a book entitled, The Formation of vegetable Mold, Through the Action of Worms, With Observations on their Habits?
A: Charles Darwin, who is better known for his revolutionary tome, Origin of the Species.  His book on worms, a pioneering work in the field of quantitative ecology published in 1881, was his last.

What was the Calypso Jacques-Yves Cousteau's ship, before he converted it into an oceanographic research vessel?
A: A minesweeper.

Who was the first person to record that the number of rings in the cross section of a tee trunk reveals its age?
A: Leonardo da Vinci. He also discovered that the width between the rings indicates annual moisture.

What's a winkle.
A: An edible sea snail.

In the world of living things, what are zebus? How about zebubs?
A: Zebus are humped cattle found in India, China  and northern Africa; zebubs are tsetse-like flies found in Ethiopia.

How many compartments does a normal cow's stomach have?
A: Four. The rumen, reticulum (storage area), omasum (where water is absorbed), and abomasum (the only compartment with digestive juices).

To what animal family does the wolverine belong--as its largest member?
A: The weasel family, Mustelidae.

What are the ornamental plumes of the male egret called?
A: Aigrettes.

If you traveled at a snail's pace, how much ground would you cover in an hour?
A: 25 feet-- for a great many species.

Bovine means cow-like.  What does murine mean?
A: Mouse-like.

What is a group of foxes called?
A: A skulk.

A cob is a male swan; a cygnet is a baby. What is the female called?
A: A pen.

What is a female rabbit called?
A: A doe. A male is a buck; a baby, a kit or kitten. The act of giving birth is known as kindling.

How did the horse chestnut tree get its name?
A: From the early use f its chestnuts as a medicine for horses.

What tree's name contains all five vowels?
A: The sequoia's.

What are amberjack, cusk and pout?
A: Fish.

What are Shaggy Mane, Slimy Gomphidius, Inky Cap, Sulphur Top and Pig's Ears?
A: Mushrooms.

What word best describes the snout of a pig?
A: Gruntle.

What is a group of owls called?
A: A parliament.

What are baby beavers called?
A: Kits or Kittens.

In what order do most pigs move their legs when walking normally?
A: Left front foot first, then right rear foot, right front foot, left rear foot.

What is the largest living invertebrate?
A: The giant squid, which achieves a length of more than 60 feet--tentacles included.

What color is the blood of an octopus?
A: Pale bluish-green.

What is unique about the food-catching technique of the anhinga--also known as the snakebird, darter or water turkey?
A: It spears fish with its long, straight, sharp bill--the only bird to do so. It has extra cervical vertebrae, which enable it to coil its neck and then release it with viper-like speed.

How many teeth does a normal adult dog have?
A:42--that's 20 on the upper jaw and 22 on the lower jaw.

Which gas released by car exhausts, stops the blood hemoglobin from working correctly?
A: Carbon Monoxide.

What name is given to the hard white material of elephant tusks?
A: Ivory.

What device is added to a car's exhaust system to reduce pollution?
A: Catalytic converter.

Which Australian mammal lays eggs?
A: Duck-billed platypus.

What is the term for something that will break down naturally?
A: Biodegradable.

Which is the most common gas in the atmosphere?
A: Nitrogen.

Which fuel is formed by the fossilization of plants?
A: Coal.

Oxygen forms approximately what proportion of the atmosphere?
A: 20%.

What kind of tide appears at full Moon?
A: Spring tide.

What is the term given to the study of the weather?
A: Meteorology.

What is the second most common gas in the atmosphere?
A: Oxygen.

What is the name given to the outermost layer of the Earth?
A: Crust.

Which country produces the world's largest quantity of municipal waste per person per year?
A: USA.

Which is the largest national park in Europe?
A: Hobe Tauern in Austria.

Which sea is so highly polluted that the Barcelona Convention was set up in 976 to try and clean it up?
A: Mediterranean Sea.

What was the viral disease controversially introduced into Britain during the 1950s to reduce the rabbit population?
A: Myxomatosis.

What is the collective noun for larks?
A: Exhalation.

What is the scientific scale for measuring the hardness of rocks?
A: Mohs' scale.

What is the world's smallest continent?
A: Australia.

Which gas forms approximately 1% of the atmosphere?
A: Argon.

What is the term for the energy obtained from hot, underground rocks?
A: Geothermal.

What name is given to the rocks swallowed by dinosaurs to assist their digestion?
A: Gastroliths.

Which animal has been hunted almost to extinction because of its horn?
A: Rhinoceros.

Which chemical, commonly used to increase crop yield, sometimes contaminates drinking water?
A: Nitrate.

Where is the Glacier Bay national park?
A: S E Alaska.

When you recycle a drink can, which metal is it you are recovering?
A: Aluminum.

What is the earth's core made of?
A: Molten iron and nickel.

What is the name of the liquid rock which pours from a volcano?
A: Lava.

What is the term applied to the process of gathering together weather forecasts from various recording stations?
A: Synoptic forecasting.

What kind of natural phenomenon 'meanders'?
A: A river.

What is a cloud?
A: Water vapor condensed into droplets.

What is the collective name for rain hail, snow, and sleet?
A: Precipitation.

What is the hardest natural substance known?
A: Diamond.

What was the name of the ship that spilt 85,000 tons of oil off the Shetland Islands in 1993?
A: Braer.

What is the collective noun for crows?
A: Murder.

What are the three main greenhouse gases?
A: Carbon dioxide; methane; chlorofluorocarbons.

25% of which traditional British feature was cut down between 1945 and 1985 because of agricultural mechanization?
A: Hedges / hedgrerows.

What is the maximum speed of a garden snail: 0.03 mph, 0.3 mph, or 3 mph?
A: 0.03 mph.

Someone who studies tectonics is probably an expert in which field?
A: Movement of continental plates.

What common mineral is formed by the fossilization of vegetation?
A: Coal.

Which theory compares the Earth to a living organism?
A: Gala hypothesis.

In which part of the atmosphere is the ozone layer?
A: Stratosphere.

Where are you likely to come across a laccolith?
A: In igneous rock.

Which Indian state is at the eastern end of the Himalayas?
A: Assam.

What is the name of the atmospheric gas which screens out the sun's harmful ultraviolet radiation?
A: Ozone.

What is the world's deepest ocean?
A: Pacific.

Which is the largest animal ever to have inhabited the Earth?
A: Blue Whale.

What once covered 14% of the Earth's land area, but by 1991 over half had been destroyed?
A: Rainforest.

Which inland sea between Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan is fast disappearing because the rivers that feed it have been diverted and dammed?
A: Aral Sea.

The damaged Chernobyl nuclear power station is situated in which country?
A: Ukraine.

What type of rock is granite?
A: Igneous.

What type of rock is basalt?
A: Igneous.

What is the main constituent of natural gas?
A: Methane.

What is the term for nutrient enrichment of lakes?
A: Eutrophication.

Which of the Earth's atmospheric layers reflects radio waves?
A: Ionosphere.

Which gas forms 80% of Earth's atmosphere?
A: Nitrogen.

In which mountain chain would you find Mount Everest?
A: Himalayas.

What is the collective term for substances such as coal, oil and natural gas, the burning of which produces carbon dioxide?
A: Fossil fuel.

What contributes to the greenhouse effect at lower atmospheric levels, but in the upper atmosphere protects life on Earth?
A: Ozone.

What is the name of the process by which substances are washed out of the soil?
A: Leaching.

Who was director of the environmental pressure group Friends of the Earth 1984 - 90?
A: Jonathon Porritt.

Which European country is committed to decommissioning all of its nuclear reactors?
A: Sweden.

Which Canadian city gave its name to the 1987world agreement on protection of the ozone layer?
A: Montreal.

Five-legged creatures have damaged which 1250 mile long wonder of the world?
A: Great Barrier Reef.

The dodo was a native bird of which island?
A: Mauritius.

What is the name given to the study of earthquakes?
A: Seismology.

How do igneous rocks form?
A: From cooling volcanic lava.

How many carats is pure gold?
A:24.

Marble is formed by the metamorphosis of which rock?
A: Limestone.

Which common water pollutant is believed to be harmful to newborn babies?
A: Nitrate.

Which radioactive substance sometimes occurs naturally in spring water?
A: Radon.

What natural feature covers approximately 6% of the Earth's land surface, and harbors 40% of the Earth's species?
A: Tropical rainforest.

What name is given to the huge growths of algae sometimes seen in polluted lakes and rivers?
A: A bloom.

What was the name of the dioxin-containing defoliant used during the
Vietnam war by the USA army?
A: Agent Orange.

In which area of the world do tropical rainforests occur?
A: On or near the equator.

CITES is an international agreement on which environmental problem?
A: The trade in endangered species.

What is the approximate circumference of the earth?
A: 24,900 miles.

What prevents the earth's atmosphere from floating out into space?
A: Gravity.

What element give amethyst its violet color?
A: Manganese.

Which of the emissions from cars are acidic?
A: Nitrogen oxides.

Which quarry in the Italian region of Tuscany is renowned for the quality of its marble?
A: Carrara.

What is the name given to the geological time period of 363-290 million years ago during which coal measures were formed?
A: Carboniferous.

Which is further north, the tropic of cancer or the tropic of Capricorn?
A: Tropic of Cancer.

What name is given to your angular distance on the Earth's surface relative to the equator?
A: Latitude.

Which landlocked Asian country is described as the world's 'highest rubbish dump' because of all the refuse left behind by expeditions?
A: Nepal.

What is the difference between weathering and erosion?
A: In erosion, particles of rock are transported away by wind or rain.

When and where was the Mount Pinatubo eruption?
A: In the Philippines, north of Manila, in 1991.

What name is given to the layer of the atmosphere closest to the surface of the Earth?
A: Troposphere.

What name is given to the Earth's single continent, which existed 250 million years ago?
A: Pangaea.

What component of CFCs causes destruction of ozone?
A: Chlorine.

Why is lead in petrol dangerous?
A: It can affect the development of the nervous system, especially in children.

What does a barometer measure?
A: Atmospheric pressure.

What is the basic chemical composition of malachite?
A: Copper carbonate.

What is the term for a fold of the Earth's crust in which the layers of rock dip inwards?
A: Syncline.

Which clouds only occur above 10,000 meters?
A: Cirrus.

What is the name of the organization which controls whaling?
A: The International Whaling Commission or IWC.

How large is the area seated within the project BioSphere 2?
A: 3.5 acres.

What kind of a person might study a podzol?
A: A soil scientist.

Where might you find an aurora?
A: The polar skies.

Which gas in the atmosphere can be turned into fertilizer by some microbes?
A: Nitrogen.

Which layer of the Earth is believed to be formed of molten iron and nickel?
A: Outer core.

Which is the world's largest nature reserve?
A: Etosha Reserve in Namibia.

What is the collective noun for rhinoceri?
A: Crash.

What name is given to the rock formations used as a source of water?
A: Aquifers.

How long does it take for the Earth to spin once on its axis?
A: One day.

Which common mineral is used to make casts, moulds, blackboard chalk and plaster of Paris?
A: Gypsum.